Add SPL vs TQL blog post (#3409)
tenzir/tenzir: web/blog/tenzir-for-splunk-users/index.md

---
title: Tenzir for Splunk Users
authors: mavam
date: 2023-08-03
tags: [zeek, threat hunting, pipelines, tql, splunk, spl]
comments: true
---

The syntax of [Tenzir Query Language (TQL)](/language) looks remarkably similar
to Splunk's [Search Processing Language (SPL)][spl]. This is by no means an

> accident. Having spoken with numerous security practitioners, we found a

Author: Reworded in 8794c72dd2.

![SPL versus TQL](spl-vs-tql.excalidraw.svg)

<!--truncate-->

## Why not SQL?

Splunk was the first tool that provided an integrated solution from interactive
data exploration to management-grade dashboards-all powered by dataflow
pipelines. The success of Splunk is not only resulting from their first-mover
advantage in the market, but also because their UX truly resonated with users:
their target audience *liked* the user experience. It was *easy* to get things
done.

At Tenzir, we have a very clear target audience: security practitioners. They
are not necessarily data engineers and fluent in SQL and low-level data tools,
but rather identify as blue teamers, incident responders, threat hunters,
detection engineers, threat intelligence analysts, and other domain experts. Our
goal is cater to these folks, without requiring them to have deep understanding
of relational algebra.

The reason why we opted for a dataflow language is that it simplifies the
reasoning: one step at a time. At least conceptually, because a smart system
optimizes the execution of the users intent so that the pipeline runs

> efficiently. Any declarative language has that property, SQL in particular. But

Author: Mind taking a look at f26a1d0ffd and see if this now reads more clearly?

the difference to SQL is that a sequential dataflow makes it easy to simply
*append* your next operation, as opposed to editing a query in the middle to
inject a complicated clause somewhere. Instead of having to understand the
entire SQL query, you just need to append an operation at the end that does the
next thing. This dataflow pipeline style is becoming more an more popular. Most
SIEMs have a language of their own, like Splunk. [Kusto][kusto] is another great
example with a wide user base in security.

[kusto]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/data-explorer/kusto/query/

In fact, there's often an isomorphic SQL expression because a lot of the

> underlying engines internally map to the same Volcano-style model of execution.

Author: I removed this in 1fdf74b029.

This gives rise to [transpiling dataflow languages to other execution
platforms][splunk-transpiler]. Ultimately, our goal is that security
practitioners do not have to think *any* of this and stay in their happy place,
which means avoiding context switches to lower-level data primitives.

[splunk-transpiler]: https://www.databricks.com/blog/2022/12/16/accelerating-siem-migrations-spl-pyspark-transpiler.html

Now that we got the SQL topic out of the way, let's dive into some hands-on
examples that illustrate the similarities and differences of SPL and TQL.

## Examples

Back in 2020, Eric Ooi wrote about [threat hunting with
Zeek](https://www.ericooi.com/zeekurity-zen-part-iv-threat-hunting-with-zeek/),
providing a set of Splunk queries that are corner stones for threat hunting.

### Connections to destination port > 1024

Splunk:

```splunk-spl
index=zeek sourcetype=zeek_conn id.resp_p > 1024
| chart count over service by id.resp_p
```

Tenzir:

```kusto
export
| where #schema == "zeek.conn" && id.resp_p > 1024

> | summarize count(.) by id.resp_p

Author: @jachris do think this is feasible until Thu or should we table it for later?

> | summarize count(.) by id.resp_p

Reviewer: I think we should introduce a small hack to make this possible, as it is a common pattern and otherwise quite awkward to express. I'm working on it right now.

> ```

Author: Yep, I added `service`. 

In general, it's impossible to compare a chart with a data frame. That's why there's a note on `chart` a bit further down.

> ```

Reviewer: [This blog post](https://www.splunk.com/en_us/blog/tips-and-tricks/search-commands-stats-chart-and-timechart.html) makes it seem like at least the underlying data is comparable.

> ```

Author: Thanks, this helps. I didn't realize that `chart` effectively does a `pivot_wider` on the second argument. Does your understanding match this?

```R
xs <- tribble(
   ~X, ~Y, ~Z,
  "a",  1, "foo",
  "b",  2, "bar",
  "a",  3, "foo",
  "b",  4, "bar",
  "c",  5, "foo"
)
```

```
❯ xs |>
   group_by(Z, X) |>
   summarize(N = sum(Y)) |>
   pivot_wider(names_from = X, values_from = N)
`summarise()` has grouped output by 'Z'. You can override using the `.groups`
argument.
# A tibble: 2 × 4
# Groups:   Z [2]
  Z         b     a     c
  <chr> <dbl> <dbl> <dbl>
1 bar       6    NA    NA
2 foo      NA     4     5
```

Since we don't have [`pivot_wider`](https://tidyr.tidyverse.org/reference/pivot_wider.html) yet, I think we need to rephrase this.

> ```

Reviewer: Sorry, I'm not too familiar with R. But I think we are on the same page.

However, I think the `chart X over Y by Z` is kind of "isomorphic" to `summarize X by Y, Z`. Same data, different layout. So perhaps the comparison is still valid.

> ```

Author: In d2e0757ea1 I explained `chart` a bit more accurately.

| sort B desc
| head 10
| extend MB=round(B/1024/1024,2)
| extend GB=round(MB/1024,2)
| put Source=id.orig_h, B, MB, GB, Services
```

This example is a bit more involved. Let's take it apart.

- We opted for Kusto's syntax of sorting, by appending an `asc` or `desc`
  qualifier after the field name. `sort -B` translates into `sort B desc`,
  whereas `sort B` into `sort B asc`.

- SPL's `eval` maps to [`extend`](/operators/transformations/extend).

- The difference between `extend` and [`put`](/operators/transformations/put) is
  that `extend` keeps all fields as is, whereas `put` reorders fields and
  performs an explicit projection with the provided fields.

### Bytes transferred over time by service

Splunk:

```splunk-spl
index=zeek sourcetype="zeek_conn" OR sourcetype="zeek_conn_long"
| eval orig_megabytes = round(orig_bytes/1024/1024,2)
| eval resp_megabytes = round(resp_bytes/1024/1024,2)
| eval orig_gigabytes = round(orig_megabytes/1024,2)
| eval resp_gigabytes = round(resp_megabytes/1024,2)
| timechart sum(orig_gigabytes) AS 'Outgoing Gigabytes',sum(resp_gigabytes) AS 'Incoming Gigabytes' by service span=1h
```

Tenzir:

```splunk-spl
export

> | where #schema == /zeek\.conn.*/

Reviewer: Perhaps you want to explain the regex matching below (and highlight its advantages)?

Author: 9cc36d81ad

| extend orig_megabytes=round(orig_bytes/1024/1024, 2)
| extend resp_megabytes=round(orig_bytes/1024/1024, 2)
| extend orig_gigabytes=round(orig_megabytes/1024, 2)
| extend resp_gigabytes=round(orig_megabytes/1024, 2)

> | summarize 'Outgoing Gigabytes'=sum(orig_gigabytes), 'Incoming Gigabytes'=sum(resp_gigabytes) by service resolution 1h

Reviewer: The `by`-clause is missing the timestamp.

Author: Should this be `by :timestamp, service`?

> | summarize 'Outgoing Gigabytes'=sum(orig_gigabytes), 'Incoming Gigabytes'=sum(resp_gigabytes) by service resolution 1h

Reviewer: Perhaps you want to take the liberty to slightly change the field names so that you don't have to use syntax that does not exist yet?

Author: Good idea, did that.

```

This example also looks quite similar in structure.

- This query spreads over two data sources: the event `zeek.conn` and
  `zeek.conn_long`. The latter tracks long-running connections and is available
  as [separate package](https://github.com/corelight/zeek-long-connections).

> - TQLs's `#schema` selector in an expression is responsible for filtering the
>   data sources. This is because all TQL pipelines are *multi-schema*, i.e., they
>   can process more than a single type of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- TQLs's `#schema` is an expression that is responsible for filtering the
  data sources. This is because all TQL pipelines are *multi-schema*, i.e., they
  can process more than a single type of data.
```

Also, you already used `#schema` before, so this feels like a weird place to explain it. Furthermore, the `#schema` expression only returns the schema name, it does not filter anything.

Author: 8aafa10484

### Rare JA3 hashes

Splunk:

```splunk-spl
index=zeek sourcetype=zeek_ssl
| rare ja3
```

Tenzir:

```splunk-spl
export
| where #schema == "zeek.ssl"
| rare ja3
| head 10

> ```

Reviewer: Difference in queries (`head`) without explanation.

> This example shows again how to select a specific data source and perform some
> "stack counting".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows again how to select a specific data source and perform
"stack counting".
```

### Expired certificates

Splunk:

```splunk-spl
index=zeek sourcetype=zeek_x509
| convert num(certificate.not_valid_after) AS cert_expire
| eval current_time = now(), cert_expire_readable = strftime(cert_expire,"%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S.%Q"), current_time_readable=strftime(current_time,"%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S.%Q")
| where current_time > cert_expire
```

Tenzir:

```splunk-spl
export
| where certificate.not_valid_after > now()
```

> This example shows the benefit of native time types (and Tenzir's rich type
> system in more generally).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows the benefit of native time types (and Tenzir's rich type
system in general).
```

- TQL's [type system](/data-model/type-system) has first-class support for times
  and durations.

> - TQL's [`zeek-tsv`](/formats/zeek-tsv) parser preserves `time` types natively,
>   so you don't have to massage strings at query time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- TQL's [`zeek-tsv`](/formats/zeek-tsv) parser preserves `time` types natively,
  so you don't have to massage strings at query-time.
```

### Large DNS queries

Splunk:

```splunk-spl
index=zeek sourcetype=zeek_dns
| eval query_length = len(query)
| where query_length > 75
| table _time id.orig_h id.resp_h proto query query_length answer
```

Tenzir:

```splunk-spl
export
| extend query_length = length(zeek.dns.query)
| where query_length > 75

> | select #timestamp, id.orig_h, id.resp_h, proto, query, query_length

Reviewer: The `length(zeek.dns.query)` syntax is debatable. Perhaps you can use `where #schema == "zeek.dns"` as before?

Author: Fixed in be04a95fb2.

> | select #timestamp, id.orig_h, id.resp_h, proto, query, query_length

Reviewer: What about `answer`?

```

We don't have functions in TQL. *Yet*. It's one of our most important roadmap
items at the time of writing, so stay tuned.

If we had functions, we would translate this query as shown above.
Splunk's `len` would map to Tenzir's `length` function, and the `_time`
field maps to the `#timestamp` selector.

### Query responses with NXDOMAIN

Splunk:

```splunk-spl
index=zeek sourcetype=zeek_dns rcode_name=NXDOMAIN
| table _time id.orig_h id.resp_h proto query
```

Tenzir:

```splunk-spl
export

> | where zeek.dns.rcode_name == "NXDOMAIN"

Reviewer: Same here.

| select #timestamp, id.orig_h, id.resp_h, proto, query
```

The `table` operator in splunk outputs the data in tabular form. This is the
default for our [app](/setup-guides/use-the-app). There's also an
[upcoming](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3113) `write table` format to

> generate textual representation outside the app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generate a tabular representation outside the app.
```

## Summary

> In this blog we've juxtaposed the languages of Splunk (SPL) and Tenzir (TQL).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog post we've juxtaposed the languages of Splunk (SPL) and Tenzir (TQL).
```
Blog _post_!

They are remarkably similar—and that's not accidental. When we talked to
security analysts we often heard that Splunk has a great UX. Even our own
engineers that live on the command line find this mindset natural. But Splunk
was not our only inspiration, we also drew inspiration from Kusto and others.

As we created TQL, we wanted to learn from missed opportunities and
bolt-on growth from past efforts, while at the same time doubling down on the

> successes others have confirmed.

Reviewer: "learn from bolt-on growth from past efforts" and "successes others have confirmed" sound not very natural to me.

If you'd like to give TQL a spin, [try our community edition](/get-started) for

> free. A demo node with examples pipelines is waiting for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
free. A demo node with example pipelines is waiting for you.
```

explain how the two languages differ using threat hunting examples.

[spl]: https://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/SplunkCloud/latest/Search/Aboutthesearchlanguage

![SPL versus TQL](spl-vs-tql.excalidraw.svg)

<!--truncate-->

## Why not SQL?

Splunk was the first tool that provided an integrated solution from interactive
data exploration to management-grade dashboards—all powered by dataflow
pipelines. The success of Splunk is not only resulting from their first-mover
advantage in the market, but also because their likable user experience: it is
*easy* to get things done.

At Tenzir, we have a very clear target audience: security practitioners. They
are not necessarily data engineers and fluent in SQL and low-level data tools,
but rather identify as blue teamers, incident responders, threat hunters,
detection engineers, threat intelligence analysts, and other domain experts. Our
goal is cater to these folks, without requiring them to have deep understanding
of relational algebra.

We opted for a dataflow language because it simplifies reasoning—one step at a
time. At least conceptually, because a smart system optimizes the execution

> under the hood. Any declarative language where users describe the desired
> outcome offers the exeuction engine to re-arrange the input, as long as it
> doesn't change the output. Particularly SQL has property, where relational
> algebra describes the *what* and not the *how*. A dataflow language is a bit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
under the hood. Any declarative language where users describe the desired
outcome offers the execution engine to rearrange the input, as long as it
doesn't change the output. Particularly SQL has this property, where relational
algebra describes the *what* and not the *how*. A dataflow language is a bit
```

> under the hood. Any declarative language where users describe the desired
> outcome offers the exeuction engine to re-arrange the input, as long as it
> doesn't change the output. Particularly SQL has property, where relational
> algebra describes the *what* and not the *how*. A dataflow language is a bit

Reviewer: Alternatively, here is a rough rewording suggestion:
```suggestion
under the hood. As long as the observable behavior remains the same, the underlying 
implementation can optimize the actual computation at will. This is especially 
noticable with declarative languages such as SQL, where the user describes the 
*what* instead of the *how*. A dataflow language is a bit
```

Author: 59f90b29d4

  Why does this single responsibility principle matter? Because it's critical
  for *composition*: we can now replace `export` with another data source, like
  [`from`](/operators/sources/from) [`kafka`](/connectors/kafka), and the rest
  of the pipeline stays the same.

- TQL's `#schema` is an expression that is responsible for filtering the data
  sources. This is because all TQL pipelines are *multi-schema*, i.e., they can
  process more than a single type of data. The ability to specify a regular
  expression makes for a powerful way to select the desired input.

- SPL's [`chart X by Y, Z`][chart] (or equivalently `chart X over Y by Z`)
  performs an implicit
  [pivot-wider](https://epirhandbook.com/en/pivoting-data.html) operation on
  `Z`. This different tabular format has the same underlying data produced by
  `summarize X by Y, Z`, which is why we are replacing it accordingly in our
  examples.

[chart]: https://www.splunk.com/en_us/blog/tips-and-tricks/search-commands-stats-chart-and-timechart.html

### Top 10 sources by number of connections

Splunk:

```splunk-spl
index=zeek sourcetype=zeek_conn
| top id.orig_h

> | head 10

Author: This came like this in the original example, but we should probably just fix it up here.

> | head 10

Reviewer: I see, then I don't mind either way.

> | head 10

Author: Okay, resolving in the interest of time then.

- The difference between `extend` and [`put`](/operators/transformations/put) is
  that `extend` keeps all fields as is, whereas `put` reorders fields and
  performs an explicit projection with the provided fields.

- We don't have functions in TQL. *Yet*. It's one of our most important roadmap
  items at the time of writing, so stay tuned.

### Bytes transferred over time by service

Splunk:

```splunk-spl
index=zeek sourcetype="zeek_conn" OR sourcetype="zeek_conn_long"
| eval orig_megabytes = round(orig_bytes/1024/1024,2)
| eval resp_megabytes = round(resp_bytes/1024/1024,2)
| eval orig_gigabytes = round(orig_megabytes/1024,2)
| eval resp_gigabytes = round(resp_megabytes/1024,2)
| timechart sum(orig_gigabytes) AS 'Outgoing',sum(resp_gigabytes) AS 'Incoming' by service span=1h
```

Tenzir:

```splunk-spl
export
| where #schema == /zeek\.conn.*/
| extend orig_megabytes=round(orig_bytes/1024/1024, 2)
| extend resp_megabytes=round(orig_bytes/1024/1024, 2)
| extend orig_gigabytes=round(orig_megabytes/1024, 2)
| extend resp_gigabytes=round(orig_megabytes/1024, 2)
| summarize Outgoing=sum(orig_gigabytes), Incoming=sum(resp_gigabytes) by :timestamp, service resolution 1h
```

Analysis:

> - SPL's `timechart` does an implicit group by timestamp. As we TQL's
>   `summarize` operator, we need to explicitly provide the group field
>   `:timestamp`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SPL's `timechart` does an implicit group by timestamp. As we use TQL's
  `summarize` operator, we need to explicitly provide the group field
  `:timestamp`.
```
